I'm gonna bring in our first guest right
now Ian Bremmer
with the Eurasia group Ian you are there
I see you hi we're glad to have you on
this hey I and I read a couple of your
notes and I read in one part that you
think we could be in a three-year crisis
and that really stood out to me because
here we are reopening and the market and
investors seem really optimistic that
this may be is a three month crisis are
we under appreciating of the impact of
koban 19 if if you're saying that people
in the markets actually think it's going
to be three months I hope they don't
think that I mean them the markets are
short-term and orientation but I mean
any CEO I'm talking to understands that
it's a very long time before we get back
to normal I mean there's a difference
because we're seeing the peak we we tend
to think that well it must be like a
mountain so both sides of the mountain
are the same it's like Mount Fuji or
something but in reality it's much more
like a tidal wave where you have this
massive initial crest and then after
that the water is quite much it's much
higher for a long time with a lot of
additional swells and we all know that
as we start opening bits of this economy
that people the government can make a
decision but that's different from
corporations making decision that's
different from consumers making
decisions to get on a plane or to go to
a restaurant or to go to a ballgame even
if those things are open and that's
different from saying that those things
are all sustainable when you only have
50% we've already heard from our even
our government leaders are telling us
that social distancing is clearly going
on for months and months not weeks and
weeks and that's a trump administration
that's in an election period focusing on
getting the economy moving again until
we have a vaccine life is going to be
different and that's going to cost a lot
of people a lot hey Ian you are so
thoughtful when it comes to geopolitics
that's kind of your bailiwick so we got
the coronavirus over here and
geopolitics over there and I'm curious
how do they meet in other words how's
the coronavirus going to change
the political socio-political calculus
of the world a few ways first is that
you're going to see a lot more
inequality we already saw that this
us-versus-them mentality inside
democracies was growing and leading to
more political polarization
anti-establishment sentiment when the
markets were going well now we're facing
the worst economic recession of our
lifetimes that's going to disenfranchise
a lot more people it elites more
political polarization which means that
the democracy's the advanced industrial
democracies their models globally will
not be as strong they will not show as
much leadership at the same time the
United States and China which have no
trust for each other will see less
interdependence they'll be more
decoupling as we bail out our companies
we're not going to say it's okay for
taxpayer money to go for lots of jobs to
be in China we want that capital we want
that manufacturing want those services
back in the United States more
localization that's already been
happening in tech and that means the
potential for an outright cold war
between the United States and China is
is getting a lot larger but a final
point is that even though the United
States isn't showing much leadership
here and China clearly is going to have
more influence because their economy has
already started up while ours is shut
down we should recognize that coming out
of this crisis the United States is
likely to be stronger than its allies
compared to going in and and I mean
think about the the resonance the the
resilience of the American banking
system compared to Europe's in this
environment think about how important
tech companies are getting getting us
through this and coming out America
dominates the tech space the Canadians
the Japanese the Europeans are nowhere
energy food you know we know that the
supply chains are getting disrupted how
great that we produce this stuff
ourselves in this environment so you
know on the one hand that means the
dollar is going to be stronger but it
also means that America's orientation
towards unilateralism and not leading a
multilateral set of Institute
with our allies on board that's gonna be
harder that's obvious under Trump but I
would suggest that even under Biden
you're not going back to the way the
country was led under Obama and I think
a lot of people still think it would be
that that's really gonna change post
coronavirus you know I want to ask you
about something I obviously the US and
the Chinese are watching closely which
is kind of the headline that broke over
the weekend rumors all over the place
about the state of or the health of Kim
jong-un and I know that you know nobody
has this sort of direct source inside
North Korea is a speculation of
speculation but I'm wondering how you're
viewing this situation right now whether
it is the potential no for kim yo-jong
to move up the ladder or you know the
potential of weeks on end without
knowing really the state of Kim Jong Gun
how do you what's the risk on that front
but obviously I have exactly as much
intelligence on the ground as you do on
this which is you know not sorry it's
hard for me to speculate but what we do
know is that two weeks of silence radio
silence from the North Koreans on the
state of their leader when there's all
of these rumors that he's dead or in a
vegetative state something is clearly
wrong that's not the way they would run
this country historically they just had
a major national holiday no word from
the supreme leader so I think that at
the very least we can say he probably
has had a serious health misstep and is
not in and is not viewable by the public
right now now if he's gone certainly the
only leader from his family that is
prepared to take his role is kim yo-jong
his his younger sister and that is what
one would expect if it wasn't such an
incredibly misogynist North Koreans any
North Korean you would talk to would say
it's inconceivable a woman could run it
and so I I don't know how to deal with
that I have no idea but what I do know
is if there's uncertainty if there's an
internal fight if there's any sense that
there's military confrontation
domestically of the
nuclear power and Kim jong-un is gone
the Chinese are coming in because
they're gonna want to secure the borders
secure the nukes and ensure that their
client state is not in disarray and
imploded and that that will lead even
though that's the least worst option for
the Americans
you will be on highest alert the US
Japan South Korea the potential in an
environment where the US and China have
the worst relations we've had in decades
the possibility of accidents that
escalation would be real in hey Rick
Newman here you were a moment ago
mentioned maybe we will have President
Biden a year from now Trump looks pretty
shaky on reelection if we do have
President Biden what changes in a big
way so he said he would rejoin the Paris
climate talks immediately which of
course was deeply unpopular he would be
in favor of a stronger Europe Trump
opposes a strong Europe he thinks it's
bad for the United States the EU Trump's
been aligned with the euro skeptic
movements Biden would not and and
certainly his personal relations with a
bunch of leaders that are interested in
u.s. global leadership multilateralism
here I'm thinking about the Canadians
the Germans the French those relations
would significantly improve but again I
want to be clear Biden would become
president in the teeth of the worst
economic Cataclysm of our lifetimes at a
time when overwhelmingly the focus would
be on how do we get 15 to 20 percent
unemployment down to a manageable level
what do we do for these people do we
need universal basic income how do we
get a vaccine going the overwhelmingly
his focus is going to be domestic and
he'll be punished if he doesn't do that
and and and the interest the support
that we will be getting from allies in
that environment will be a lot less than
it would have been historically so I
also get the likelihood of a cold war
with China goes down if Biden becomes
president because he's not going to be
as interested in picking a fight for
political reasons but but I would I
think that the the general view
is that if Biden becomes president
we now have American leadership like it
used to be I strongly strongly disagree
with that the Europeans are weaker and
more divided the Russians are in serious
decline in trying hard to undermine us
the Chinese are in a stronger position
and want to build competitive
architecture none of that changes if
Biden becomes president I would argue
all of those things have been much more
important to the way we think about the
global order then shifts from Obama to
Trump and they will prove to be more
important than a potential shift from
Trump to bide hey Ian its miles here I
want to pick up on something you
mentioned there which is Europe we're so
focused here in the u.s. or on case
counts and getting this under control
you're a peasant is a huge task ahead of
them digging their economy out of this
and you know they have to coordinate
multiple nations their fiscal policy
with the ECB what's the challenge from
your vantage point facing Europe over
the next nine months and I mentioned
they don't have the tech companies right
so they're gonna have to be takers not
makers as the Americans I mean the other
ones that want privacy we were talking
about breaking them up Elizabeth Warren
all that goes out the window
so the Americans are going to be more
important to these guys going forward
you know the ability of the Europeans to
ensure that there is enough money for
bailouts and everybody can blow out
their deficit take on more debt that
could happen but the idea of debt
mutualization between the highly
indebted no-growth south and the more
productive Germans and Dutch and the
rest that's not happening and and so the
way I would think about coronavirus is
not that it changes the world so much as
it speeds up a whole bunch of things
that were already happening it takes ten
years and compresses them into one and a
half so we knew that there was growing
inequality but now we get ten years of
inequality in 18 months growing we knew
the US China didn't trust each other we
was heading towards confrontation we get
10 years of that in 18 months we knew
Tec was disrupting the world but we get
10 years that 18 months we knew that
Europe was fundamentally unsustainable
in terms of we saw the Greek crisis
between the Germans and the Italians
now that's going to be driven forward
much more quickly as well and when you
compress that much unsustainability
geopolitically and economically a few
things probably break that's what we
want to see happen so in terms of what
we know we also know a vaccine is
incredibly important we're seeing the
race for this vaccine it spread across
many geographies how important do you
think it is to be the country the first
country that finds a vaccine does it
matter oh I think it matters look god
bless Bill Gates
I've been hour surprised this weekend
that he was as much of an apologist for
China as he turned out to be he really
didn't want to like do any like they're
not responsible for anything less a
distraction I don't think it's true but
Bill Gates is doing more than anyone to
try to ensure that we have a global
vaccine that everybody gets and I hope
he's successful because the reality is
you know there's not going to be the
ability to produce this vaccine for
billions of people in a month or two
when it is created it's more likely to
be created by an American company maybe
European unlikely to be Chinese not
everyone is going to get at the same
time and as we see I mean we've seen how
politicized PPE has been we see how
politicized tests have been ventilators
have been I mean think about what that
is going to mean when people can or
cannot get a vaccine and that is the
difference between you and your family
going back to the economy fully you and
your country getting back up and running
fully or not I mean if you think we have
a geopolitical fight over medical supply
chain now it is nothing like what you're
going to see in the first six months
after a successful vaccine has created a
and last question here I'm wondering if
you consider the generational rift
that's out there in terms of younger
people being concerned say about the
environment and concerned about older
people bailing out the economy and
younger people having to pay for it is
that something that worries you a little
bit I mean I guess I'm
personally less worried about the
generational right now and more worried
just about double-digit numbers of
working and middle-class people in the
advanced industrial economies that
aren't going to have anything productive
to do I worry about a move towards a
global middle class for all of our
lifetimes around the world all of these
people out of poverty now going back
into poverty I think as Americans we're
always looking for the bright side of
everything and even in the worst crises
we say okay well there's some losers but
there are some winners too let let us
understand I mean yeah tech companies
will do better there'll be some stocks
you can pick humanity is not going to do
better coming out of this crisis it's
going to worse emerging markets will be
submerging the developed world will not
have the same quality of life inequality
will be a lot greater nobody wins the
Chinese may be in better relative
position visa fees some poor countries
it would be vastly better for China if
this had never happened there's no
country in the world that you're going
to be able to go back in three five
years time and say we came out better
because of that coronavirus crisis and I
think that that that means this is a
time for us to learn lessons to become
stronger going forward but not to
pretend because this is going to be
tough
Ian Bremmer you always give us so much
to think about
really appreciate you're giving us time
today a president of your razor group
and g0 media Ian Bremmer hey investors
sack Guzman here are you interested in
learning more about the markets and
getting the latest financial news well
then click right here to subscribe to
our yahoo finance youtube channel get
the latest up-to-the-minute market
analysis big interviews in the world of
finance and information on how to manage
your money every day wherever you are